---
title: 'Beyond the AI Buzz'
description: "An Investor's Guide to Spotting AI-Washing"
date: 2025-08-11
tags: ['investing','ai']
image: '@/assets/storyset/question.svg'
authors: ['aurel']
---

## Executive Summary 

The proliferation of artificial intelligence, particularly since the public
launch of generative AI platforms like ChatGPT in late 2022, has triggered an
unprecedented wave of corporate and investor interest. Analysis of corporate
earnings calls reveals a more than fivefold surge in AI-related discussions
following this period, signaling a transformational shift in business strategy
and market focus. This AI gold rush presents a generational opportunity for
investors to capitalize on what many believe will be the next major
technological revolution. However, this excitement is shadowed by a significant
and growing risk: "AI-washing."

> **AI-washing** is the practice of exaggerating, misrepresenting, or fabricating a
company's artificial intelligence capabilities to appear more technologically
advanced and innovative than it truly is. Much like "greenwashing" in the
environmental, social, and governance (ESG) space, AI-washing exploits market
hype to gain a competitive advantage, attract capital, and inflate stock
prices.

The pressure on companies to present a compelling "AI story" to
investors and consumers is immense. This pressure, combined with the current
lack of standardized metrics for measuring AI implementation and compliance,
creates a fertile ground for false promises and misleading statements.

The phenomenon is so acute that it has captured the attention of top regulators.
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has explicitly warned that a
company's disclosures about AI are subject to the fundamental principles of
securities laws. This means any claims made must have a reasonable basis, and
that basis should be disclosed to investors. Former SEC Chair Gary Gensler has
cautioned companies to be "truthful" about their AI claims and to transparently
discuss the associated risks and how they are managed. This regulatory focus
elevates AI-washing from a mere marketing nuisance to a serious legal and
financial liability.

The current market environment can be understood as progressing through a
classic "hype-to-scrutiny" cycle. The initial phase, marked by the explosion of
AI mentions in corporate communications, represented the peak of the hype, where
simple association with the term "AI" could confer value. This naturally
created a powerful financial incentive for companies to exaggerate their AI
credentials, leading to the second phase of widespread deception. The SEC's
recent enforcement actions and public warnings signal the beginning of the third
phase: scrutiny. In this new phase, the market will begin to differentiate
between superficial claims and genuine, integrated AI. Investors who can adopt
an analytical, skeptical mindset are best positioned to navigate this shift,
avoiding the pitfalls of hype and identifying truly valuable opportunities.

## 1. The High Cost of Hype: Investor Risks and Market Distortion

The consequences of AI-washing extend far beyond deceptive marketing. For
investors, the most immediate risk is significant financial loss. Investing in a
company based on exaggerated or false AI claims can lead to backing an
overvalued or, in some cases, fraudulent enterprise. A stark example is the case
of Joonko, a recruiting startup that falsely claimed to have over 100 customers,
more than $1 million in annual recurring revenue, and proprietary AI technology.
In reality, the company had minimal revenue and lacked the advertised AI
functionalities, leading to its collapse and losses for its investors.

Beyond individual losses, AI-washing poses a systemic risk to the market. It
erodes trust not only in the companies making false claims but in the
credibility of AI technology itself. When capital and attention are diverted to
firms with the best marketing rather than the best technology, it stifles
genuine innovation. Legitimate AI pioneers find it harder to compete for funding
and talent, slowing the pace of technological progress that could deliver real
societal and economic benefits. This market distortion ultimately harms the
entire investment ecosystem, including the long-term prospects of authentic AI
leaders.

## 2. Decoding Corporate Narratives: A Linguistic Toolkit for Investors

The first line of defense against AI-washing is a critical analysis of a
company's own words. Corporate communications—from press releases and marketing
materials to executive presentations and earnings calls—are filled with clues.
Differentiating between the empty rhetoric of "AI pretenders" and the specific,
operational language of "AI leaders" is a crucial skill for any investor in this
space.

### 2.1 The Buzzword Smokescreen: Identifying Vague and Misleading Language

Companies engaging in AI-washing often rely on a smokescreen of vague buzzwords
and jargon to create an illusion of technological sophistication. Phrases like
"AI-powered," "leveraging AI," "synergy," "paradigm shift," and "digital
transformation" are frequently used as catch-alls that lack specificity. These
terms are red flags when they are not accompanied by concrete details. A claim
that a product is "AI-powered" is meaningless without an explanation of what the
AI actually does, how it works, what data it uses, and what specific, measurable
value it delivers.

Investors should be particularly wary of grandiose but empty statements. For
example, a firm claiming to "convert personal data into a renewable source of
investable capital" is using impressive-sounding language to obscure a lack of
any real, understandable process. The most powerful tool for an investor
encountering such language is to ask a simple question: "What does that actually
mean in practice?" If a clear, straightforward answer is not readily available,
it is a strong indicator of AI-washing. The overuse of the term "AI" itself,
repeated in marketing materials without any substance, is another significant
red flag.

The correlation between the level of specificity in a company's disclosures and
the credibility of its AI claims is direct and powerful. Vagueness is not an
accident; it is often a deliberate strategy to hide a lack of substance.
Specificity, on the other hand, is a hallmark of genuine operational
integration. A company with a real, functioning AI system has a wealth of
operational details it can share: the models it uses, the hardware it runs on,
the specific problems it solves, the key performance indicators (KPIs) it
impacts, and the strategic partnerships it has formed. A company merely
pretending to have AI capabilities has no such details and must resort to
abstractions and buzzwords. Therefore, an investor can use specificity as a
highly reliable proxy for credibility, transforming the analysis of language
from a soft skill into a hard analytical tool.

### 2.2 The AI Buzzword-to-Substance Translator

To make this distinction practical, the following table translates common
red-flag buzzwords into the specific, verifiable language that a genuine AI
company would use. This serves as a field guide for investors to assess the
quality of corporate communication in real time.

|Red Flag Buzzword|Green Flag Substance (Illustrative Examples)|
|---|---|
|**"AI-Powered"**|"Our system uses a Natural Language Processing (NLP) model trained on 10 million customer service transcripts to categorize support tickets, reducing average response time by 30%." |
|**"Leveraging Big Data"**|"We analyze 5 terabytes of anonymized logistical data daily to optimize shipping routes, resulting in a 15% reduction in fuel consumption and delivery times." |
|**"AI-Driven Insights"**|"Our computer vision algorithm, running on Nvidia's Blackwell platform, analyzes production line imagery to detect manufacturing defects with 99.8% accuracy, reducing scrap rates by 7%." |
|**"Proprietary Algorithm"**|"Our novel approach to data compression for AI model training is protected by three U.S. patents (e.g., US Patent #XXXXXXXX), which gives us a significant performance advantage over standard methods." |
|**"Revolutionary Solution"**|"Our AI-driven inventory management system, which integrates real-time sales data and supply chain feeds, led to a 5% reduction in inventory carrying costs and a 10% increase in sales from reduced stockouts in the last fiscal year." |
|**"Strategic Synergy"**|"Our partnership with OpenAI allows us to integrate the latest GPT-4 models directly into our CRM platform via API, enabling our customers to generate sales emails that are 40% more effective based on A/B testing." |

### 2.3 The Earnings Call Litmus Test: Where Hype Meets Reality

While marketing materials are often crafted to be aspirational, the quarterly
earnings call is where the narrative meets reality. The unscripted Question &
Answer (Q&A) session, in particular, is the most crucial forum for investors to
conduct linguistic analysis. This is where management's prepared remarks are
stress-tested by pointed questions from professional analysts.

The contrast between AI pretenders and leaders becomes stark in this setting.

- **Pretenders** often resort to boilerplate language, repeat marketing slogans,
and offer vague assurances when pressed for details. They may use generic terms
like "headwinds" to describe challenges or talk about "navigating operational
complexities" to avoid discussing specific failures. Their answers lack depth
and often deflect from the core question.

- **Leaders** speak with operational specificity. They discuss their AI
initiatives using concrete product names (Apple Intelligence, Microsoft
Copilot), specific technology platforms (Nvidia Blackwell, Azure AI), key
strategic goals (Sovereign AI, Private Cloud Compute), and major
partnerships (OpenAI, Foxconn). They can quantify market impact, referencing
billions in revenue from AWS AI services or faster adoption rates for new
AI-enabled iOS versions. When a CEO can discuss the precise impact of U.S.
export controls on their next-generation chip supply (as Nvidia does) or detail
investments in custom AI accelerators like Amazon's Trainium and Microsoft's
Maia 100, it signals a deep operational reality that a pretender cannot fake.


Sophisticated institutional investors are increasingly using AI-powered tools to
analyze these calls, going beyond transcripts to assess sentiment, vocal
forensics (such as pitch fluctuations and voice tremors indicating stress), and
patterns of coached evasiveness during the Q&A. While retail investors may not
have access to these tools, they can adopt the same mindset by paying close
attention not just to _what_ is said, but to _how_ directly and substantively
questions are answered.

## 3. The Due Diligence Playbook: Verifying Claims and Finding Ground Truth

After analyzing what a company says, the next critical step is to independently
verify its claims. This process of due diligence moves beyond language and into
the realm of evidence. For the retail investor, the internet provides a powerful
set of free tools to act as a digital detective and find the ground truth behind
the marketing pitch.

### 3.1 Is There a Product Behind the Pitch?

A company with a genuine AI product will be eager to show it off. Conversely, a
company engaged in AI-washing will often be long on claims and short on proof.
Investors should actively seek tangible evidence of a functioning product. Key
items to look for include:

- **Live Demonstrations and Prototypes:** The most compelling evidence is seeing
the product in action. Look for video demonstrations, recorded webinars, or
interactive prototypes on the company's website. A company that makes grand
claims but offers no way to see the technology work should be viewed with
extreme skepticism.

- **Technical Documentation and Whitepapers:** Legitimate AI companies often
publish technical details about their architecture, the models they use, and the
data they were trained on. While these can be dense, their very existence
signals a level of transparency and technical substance.

- **Client Adoption and Case Studies:** Who actually uses this product? Look for
a list of clients, customer testimonials, and detailed case studies. A strong
case study will not just name a client but will explain the problem the AI
solved and provide quantifiable results. Be wary of companies that cannot name
any clients or whose "partnerships" are just logos on a slide.

- **Patents:** If a company claims its technology is "proprietary," a search of
patent databases like the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) or Google
Patents can help verify this. While not all valuable technology is patented, a
portfolio of relevant patents adds significant credibility.

- **Third-Party Validation:** Has the company's technology been reviewed or
audited by independent experts? Some firms engage third parties to validate
their AI implementations and security protocols, which can provide an objective
seal of approval.


A particularly insidious form of deception to watch for is the
"human-in-the-loop" trick. This involves a company claiming a process is
automated by sophisticated AI when, in reality, it is being performed by
low-cost human labor behind the scenes. For example, a service that markets
"AI-powered receipt scanning" might actually be using a team of human data-entry
clerks. This is a critical distinction for an investor, as it fundamentally
alters the business model. A true AI business should have high upfront
development costs but low marginal costs, allowing for massive scalability and
high profit margins. A human-powered service has linear costs that scale
directly with volume, severely limiting both scalability and profitability. An
investor who believes they are funding a high-tech, scalable AI company when
they are actually funding a low-margin services business is being fundamentally
deceived about the investment's potential. A key due diligence question to ask
is: "Is this a task that truly requires AI, or could it be done by humans?" This
critical lens is essential for filtering out this deceptive practice.

### 3.2 Investigating the Corporate Foundation: Basic Vetting

Sometimes, AI-washing is a symptom of more fundamental business problems or even
outright fraud. A few basic checks using publicly available resources can
quickly raise red flags about a company's legitimacy.

- **Business Registration:** Verify that the company is a legally registered
entity. In the U.S., this can be done through the Secretary of State website for
the state in which the company is incorporated. For UK companies, the Companies
House registry is the primary source.

- **Address Verification:** Use Google Maps and its Street View feature to look
up the company's listed corporate headquarters. Is it a legitimate office
building, or is it a residential address, a P.O. box, or a shared virtual office
service? While many startups begin in humble settings, a company claiming to be
a global AI leader operating out of a suburban home warrants further
investigation.

- **Executive Team and Employee Base:** Research the leadership team on
LinkedIn. Do their stated backgrounds, education, and prior experience align
with running a complex AI company?. Cross-reference the company's claimed size
with its employee count on LinkedIn. A firm claiming to have a revolutionary AI
platform but listing only a handful of employees should be questioned.
Furthermore, review sites like Glassdoor can provide insights from current and
former employees about the company's culture, management, and the reality of its
technological capabilities.


### 3.3 The Retail Investor's Due Diligence Checklist

This checklist provides a simple, repeatable process for conducting basic due
diligence on a potential investment. It turns the abstract concept of "doing
your homework" into a concrete set of actions.

|Category|Verification Step|Status (✔/✖/?)|Notes|
|---|---|---|---|
|**Product Verification**|Found demo/video of the product in action?|||
||Found specific client case studies with testimonials?|||
||Searched for relevant patents (USPTO/Google Patents)?|||
||Found technical whitepapers or documentation?|||
|**Corporate Verification**|Verified legal business registration (e.g., Secretary of State)?|||
||Checked physical address on Google Maps/Street View?|||
||Reviewed executive team's background on LinkedIn?|||
||Checked employee count/reviews on LinkedIn/Glassdoor?|||
|**Online Presence**|Reviewed company's social media for recent activity/engagement?|||
||Searched for company name + "scam," "fraud," or "review"?|||

## 4. The AI Investment Framework: Separating Contenders from Pretenders

Once a company has passed the initial filters for hype and basic verification, a
deeper analysis of its business fundamentals is required. This framework helps
investors evaluate whether AI is a superficial marketing tactic or a core driver
of sustainable value creation.

### 4.1 Evaluating the AI Strategy and Governance: Is AI Central or Peripheral?

For genuine AI leaders, artificial intelligence is not merely a product feature;
it is a core component of corporate strategy that necessitates a fundamental
rewiring of the entire business. Superficial adoption of AI tools is common,
but deep integration that drives bottom-line results is rare. Research from
McKinsey shows that while nearly all companies are investing in AI, very few
consider their deployment to be mature. Investors should look for key
indicators that a company is treating AI with strategic seriousness:

- **CEO-Level Oversight:** The single factor most correlated with higher
self-reported bottom-line impact from AI is the CEO's direct oversight of AI
governance. When AI strategy and risk management are a C-suite priority,
rather than being delegated to a lower-level IT function, it signals a deep
organizational commitment.

- **Fundamental Workflow Redesign:** The greatest impact on earnings before
interest and taxes (EBIT) comes not from simply adopting AI tools, but from
fundamentally redesigning business processes and workflows to leverage AI's
capabilities. This involves rethinking how tasks are performed, how decisions
are made, and how value is delivered to the customer.

- **Centralized Governance and Risk Management:** Mature organizations often
establish a centralized body, such as a "Center of Excellence," to manage
AI-related risk, compliance, and data governance. This structured approach is
crucial for mitigating risks like inaccuracy, data privacy violations,
cybersecurity threats, and intellectual property infringement.

- **Investment in Specialized Talent:** A company's commitment to AI can be seen
in its hiring patterns. Look for investment in specialized roles beyond data
scientists, such as "AI ethics specialists," "AI compliance specialists," and
machine learning operations (MLOps) engineers. This indicates a sophisticated
understanding of what it takes to deploy AI responsibly and at scale.


### 4.2 Assessing the Competitive Moat: What Makes the AI Defensible?

A company's long-term success in AI depends on its ability to build and defend a
durable competitive advantage, or "moat." Investors must analyze the sources of
this moat to determine if the company's position is sustainable. Key factors
to evaluate include:

- **Proprietary Technology and Data:** Does the company possess unique, patented
algorithms or processes that are difficult for competitors to replicate?. Even
more important is access to a proprietary dataset. High-quality, well-labeled
data is the lifeblood of AI, and a unique data asset can be a more powerful moat
than any single algorithm.

- **Research and Development (R&D) Investment:** The AI field is evolving at a
breakneck pace. Companies that are not investing heavily and consistently in R&D
will quickly fall behind. While high R&D spending can depress short-term
profitability, it is a crucial indicator of a company's commitment to future
innovation.

- **Strategic Partnerships:** Deep collaborations with major technology platform
providers (e.g., Nvidia for hardware, AWS or Microsoft Azure for cloud
infrastructure) or key industry leaders can provide access to cutting-edge
technology, large markets, and credibility.

- **Quality of Management and Talent:** An experienced leadership team with a
proven track record is essential for navigating the volatile AI market. The
ability to attract and retain world-class AI researchers and engineers is
another critical component of a company's competitive moat.


### 4.3 Connecting AI to the Bottom Line: The Search for ROI

Ultimately, an investment is only as good as the financial returns it generates.
The ultimate test for any corporate AI initiative is whether it creates tangible
business value. Measuring the Return on Investment (ROI) for AI can be complex,
as its benefits are often multifaceted and can emerge over a long period. A
useful approach is to look for evidence of ROI across three distinct categories
12:

1. **Measurable ROI (Hard Returns):** These are direct, quantifiable financial
impacts. Investors should look for specific metrics in company reports and
presentations. Examples include: "Our AI-powered fraud detection system reduced
fraudulent transactions by $X million," or "Automating our customer service
triage with an AI chatbot reduced operational costs in that department by
Y%.".

2. **Strategic ROI (Long-Term Value):** This category assesses how AI
contributes to the company's long-term competitive position. While harder to
quantify, it is critically important. Examples include using AI to gain a
first-mover advantage in a new market, using AI-driven personalization to
increase customer loyalty and lifetime value, or using AI to accelerate drug
discovery pipelines.

3. **Capability ROI (Organizational Strength):** This refers to how an AI
investment enhances the company's overall skills and agility. Evidence includes
workforce reskilling programs to improve AI literacy, the development of an
internal AI platform that accelerates future projects, and fostering a culture
of data-driven innovation.


A genuine AI company should be able to articulate and track the Key Performance
Indicators (KPIs) that measure the success of its AI initiatives. The absence of
clear metrics is a major red flag, suggesting that the company is not seriously
managing its AI investments for value.

It is crucial for investors to set realistic expectations regarding the timeline
for these returns. Analysis shows there is often a significant lag between a
company's initial deployment of AI and a measurable impact on its
enterprise-level earnings. While many companies report revenue increases and
cost reductions at the _business unit_ level, over 80% are not yet seeing a
tangible impact on overall, enterprise-level EBIT. This is due to the high
upfront costs of technology and talent, and the time it takes to redesign
workflows and scale solutions across an entire organization. This reality
reframes the investor's task. Instead of asking the binary question, "Is AI
boosting profits today?", the more sophisticated question is, "Is there clear
evidence of value creation at the business-unit level and a credible strategy to
scale these benefits to the enterprise level?" Looking for these leading
indicators—like business-unit ROI and clear KPIs—can help identify promising
companies before their success is fully reflected in their stock price.

### 4.4 The AI Investment Evaluation Scorecard

This scorecard synthesizes the entire framework into a single evaluation tool.
It allows an investor to systematically rate a company across the most critical
dimensions, helping to remove emotion from the decision-making process and build
a holistic, evidence-based investment thesis.

|Evaluation Criteria|What to Look For (Green Flags)|Score (1-5)|
|---|---|---|
|**1. Linguistic Clarity**|Uses specific, operational language (product names, metrics). Avoids vague buzzwords. Answers questions directly in Q&A sessions.||
|**2. Product Verification**|Publicly available demos, detailed client case studies with quantifiable results, and relevant patents exist.||
|**3. Corporate Legitimacy**|Company registration, physical address, and executive/employee credentials are all verified and appear legitimate.||
|**4. Strategic Centrality**|CEO has direct oversight of AI governance. Evidence of fundamental workflow redesign, not just tool adoption.||
|**5. Competitive Moat**|Possesses proprietary technology, unique data assets, strong R&D pipeline, and strategic partnerships with platform leaders.||
|**6. Demonstrable ROI**|Articulates and tracks clear KPIs for AI initiatives. Provides evidence of measurable (hard) and strategic (long-term) returns.||
|**7. Risk Management**|Transparently discloses and actively mitigates AI-related risks (inaccuracy, bias, cybersecurity, IP infringement, regulatory).||
|**Overall Score**||**/ 35**|

## Conclusion: Investing with Confidence in the AI Revolution

The artificial intelligence revolution promises to reshape industries and create
enormous wealth, but the path for investors is fraught with peril. The
prevalence of AI-washing threatens to mislead investors, misallocate capital,
and erode trust in this transformative technology. However, by moving beyond the
buzz and adopting a disciplined, analytical approach, investors can effectively
navigate this complex landscape.

### Synthesizing the Framework

The core of this guide rests on a three-pillar evaluation process:

1. **Decode the Language:** Learn to distinguish the specific, operational
language of genuine AI leaders from the vague, jargon-filled rhetoric of
pretenders. Treat specificity as a direct proxy for credibility.

2. **Verify the Claims:** Move from words to evidence. Actively seek proof of a
real product, real customers, and a legitimate corporate foundation using
publicly available tools.

3. **Analyze the Fundamentals:** Assess the company's strategic commitment to
AI, the durability of its competitive moat, its approach to risk management,
and, most importantly, its ability to connect AI investments to tangible,
measurable business value.


A skeptical mindset is the investor's greatest asset. Question everything,
demand proof, and be wary of claims that seem too good to be true.

### The Final Checklist: Your Pre-Investment Go/No-Go

Before committing capital to any company claiming to be an AI player, an
investor should be able to answer "yes" to these critical questions:

- Does the company speak in specifics (e.g., product names, performance metrics,
hardware platforms) rather than generic buzzwords?

- Can I find independent proof of a real product with real, named customers and
verifiable case studies?

- Is AI central to the company's corporate strategy, with clear evidence of
CEO-level oversight and a fundamental redesign of business workflows?

- Can the company clearly articulate its competitive moat—the proprietary
technology, unique data, or strategic partnerships that defend it from
competitors?

- Can the company show how its AI initiatives are impacting specific, measurable
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) related to cost, revenue, or strategic goals?

- Does the company transparently disclose the risks associated with its AI
models (e.g., inaccuracy, bias, regulatory hurdles) and its plans to mitigate
them?


### A Long-Term Perspective

The AI revolution will not be a fleeting trend; it will unfold over decades. The
goal for the long-term investor is not to chase the short-term momentum of the
most-hyped stocks, but to identify well-managed, strategically-sound companies
that are building defensible moats and are positioned to create sustainable
value over time. The most significant returns will likely accrue to those who
can patiently hold high-quality businesses that are genuinely integrating AI into their operational DNA.

By employing the frameworks and tools outlined in this report, any
diligent retail investor can cut through the noise, avoid the most common
pitfalls of AI-washing, and make investment decisions with the rigor and
confidence of a seasoned professional analyst.